---
layout: post
title: Ayn Rand, The Fountainhead
snip: A brief review of one of the most riveting books I have read so far.
humanDate: December, 2013
cover: http://www.wallpapers-web.com/data/out/93/4563064-great-wallpapers.jpg
---

Imagine you are standing on the shore of an ocean. It is night time and an ever
slight breeze is pushing you towards the ocean. You walk, barefooot, on the
sand until the cool water brushes lightly over you. Once the tingles subside,
you notice a large wave approaching. It comes to you in the shape of an
attempt, one that you know will not win you over, but will merely wet your
ankles by the time it reaches you. And so it happens. The first wave blows
past, making your feet sink in the now melting sand.

As you feel the breeze gain courage, a second wave is visible. The froth is
more menacing on this one. It is more focussed and decisive. It looks like it
will move you, but by the time the wave reaches you, it is spent on the low
floor of the ocean and only manages to sink you a little deeper into the sand.

You now bend over to feel the water in your palms, to see it slip away the same
way it always does, leaving behind only a moist, cool sensation. The last wave
recedes with surprising intensity. It almost moved your feet this time.

You look over at the moon, now peeking from behind a cloud. A child like
innocence you can't quite place. It goes darker as the moon recedes. You can
hear a wave that you have not seen or heard before. It comes up suddenly, as if
it drew its energy from you by exemplifying your faults, by pointing out
everything you disliked about yourself.

The wave that just met you is actually just a wavefront for a larger,
complimentary wave, and before you realise it, it sneaks up to you and washes
all over you. Peculiarly, these wavefronts have a lot in common, yet are so
distinct, almost as if the source of their combined power lay in their
differences. The crest of one perfectly matching the trough of another and
making the sum invisible, but dreadfully powerful. You can feel the resonance
of the two waves as many small nudges remind you of the power of the two
receding fronts.

As they are pulled back into the ocean, they leave you behind wondering.
Wondering about the stark differences in the waves that have hit you so far and
touched you because they were not waves as much as traits. Traits that you come
across everyday but only more distilled, almost pure.

<hr>

<i>The Fountainhead</i> is about four men, men who are idealizations of the
traits they represent and their interactions with a masochistic woman and
themselves.

The books is divided into four parts, each part an exhaltation of one of the
men, dominated entirely by the individual's personality and carrying mere
undercurrents of the others. 

It is a daring novel because it reasons with you as it goes along. It inspires
and provokes thought about your ideals on individualism. It, in my opinion,
exposes false altruism and firmly criticizes collectivism as a principle that
devalues the human nature. All of this while gripping you in a well-knit story
line.
