---
layout: post
title: On Citizenship and Law
snip: An exploration of citizenship as a contract and the inherenet obligation on the part of citizenry to abide by the rules, laws and duties prescribed by the state
---

First, let's examine citizenship in the context of a modern democracy.  When
one accepts to become a citizen of a state, the underlying *contract* is that
one will abide by the laws of the state, will obey directives instituted by the
state and participate in the society like other citizens.  This contract isn't
totalitarian.  After becoming a citizen, if a piece of legislation or a
directive doesn't comply with the well-being of the state's people, citizen's
have every right to protest its existence or ask for it to be changed.

This brings us to another important question: What, if any, is the purpose of a
state?  Why not live in simple distributed societies with their own code of
law?  Large institutions, such as the modern-state, or even kingdoms exist
because they align well with human purpose.  They allow us to focus on what we
want to pursue and not be bogged down with administrative and judicial duties.

## The State

I believe the state is one of humanity's most advanced acheivements.  It is an
indicator of the consensual purpose of the human collective.  The problem with
not having a state-like entity is the inability of people to advance or
specialize.  They are constantly bogged down with mundane details and cannot
pursue their interests.

To work on anything in particular, we need two kinds of things.
Familiarity/certainty, and corresponding unfamiliarity/uncertainty.  We prefer
that the things we find familiar are the ones we aren't interested in and the
ones that we find unfamiliar are the things we want to learn/know about.

Say you want to study plants, you would want to know how they grow, under what
conditions they are able to survive best and the like.  You would want some
unfamiliarity in this field: you would want that there be more to know, you
would want challenges because you *want* to study plants.

During the course of your study, there are many other things you need to worry
about: your health, your children/family's well being, there being no outward
intrusions to your garden, etc.  In these finer details of things you are
hardly interested in, you would want familiarity and predictability.  You
simply do not want to worry about anything other than your interests.

The state exists for that purpose.  It is a framework that is capable of
ensuring an environment that provides for certainty, familiarity and
predictability in daily life.  From conventions to assist daily life such as a
*correct* side of the road to provisions to sustain daily life like laws
against murder etc.

<graduate from hierarchy of needs to a hierarchy of purposes>

[maslow]:http://www.simplypsychology.org/maslow.html 
